History Day!

Conflicts with native americans have been ongoing since we landed in 1607--little by little we've pushed them off their lands. It really took off in 1848 after the Mexican War... when Pres. Polk decided to steal a 3rd of Mexican land. After mex war we got CA, AZ, NM, NV, parts of OK, WY, CO...

In 1910 we bought the southern half of AZ from Mex (Gatsden purchase)... told them we were gonna take it otherwise.

Everybody wanted to move west... 1849 Gold Rush. No Panama canal... ships had to go around horn... 1/3 didn't make it. Indians resisted the movement of people west. US Army was only 25,000 strong at this time...

Base unit in cav and inf was company 88-101 men. Most of the time they were understaffed.... reason goes back to civil war. Fed gov. didn't have authority to raise a military--feds had to beg the states to get troops... states formed units and formed volunteer. 

Coming out of west point was a slow process; however, when states started to make officers--they were looking for experienced people--they were looking for mexican war vets and West Point grads (only graduating 50 people a year). States got "credit" for how many units they got for civil war.

2.5 million men under arms during the civil war... of those 25% died (most from disease).

So, company base unit... inf had 10 companies to regiment... cav had 12--> there was a reason.

If manned fully 1000-1200 per regiment... 2+ regiments to brigade 2+ brigades made a div ... 2+ div made a corps 2+ corps made an Army.


During civ war sioux in dakotas and mn rose up because troops had left to go to war... sioux burned towns... had to send troops back. After war congress allowed for 75000 troops as opposed to 25000 but didnt have good sense as to what they were doing... how to form them. Lots of infantry units... not really useful against indians on horses. BUUT most officer corps were battle hardened

Custer graduated last in his class -- not smart... Was under McCllean in Antitem... went back to MI and resigned commission from regular army.

Gov of MI appointed him col b/c he was a West Point guy... and he knew how to ride a horse. So, they took for regiments of cav, turned into brigade... and gave command to Custer... brigade commander = briagdier general. He goes off and fights in the civil war. 

You have to give him some credit b/c he was very brave. Union cav in begginning stunk against southerns who grew up on horses and firing guns... just needed to be taught tactics. Early years of civil war most of northern cav just trying to keep from falling off horse. Southerns knew how to ride AND MORE IMPORT knew how to care of hourse. By end of war northern cav learned and got better..


They weren't really cav.... misnomer... in napoleans time cav could attack inf in open... guns were terrible. Civil war comes along and they figured out how to make a better easier to load rifle... first battle of bull run at manassas.. cav attacked inf and they got shot out of saddles... this wouldn't have happened in napolean time bc guns were so inaccurate.

In reality... cav were dragoons... mounted infantry. Used horses for mobility.... pioneered by phil sheridan, took over after grant took over in 1864... friend of grants from out west... sheridan became enamoured by Custer and promoted custer to major general.

Custer was very brave... not adverse to leading charges from the front. Sheridan was there to keep him out of trouble...

most officers reduced under Grant... bc the volunteer army was dispanded 

instead of leading a whole div of cav, custer was given command of regiment... bumped from liet to liet col


Chief of sioux at time-- Redcloud--- country was moving west... wagon trails... railroads... red cloud started hitting wagon trails and railroads... sent army units to look for them... sioux were best light cav in the world. Army had plow horses but sioux didn't have that--could run rings around us cav. 

If you sent out 200-300 men, never saw sioux... sned out 10 men, they didnt come back. US put forts all along trials with mostly infantry and some cav. Indians weren't gonna attack forts... indians never understood artillery and it scared the hell out of them.

Fetterman massacre... civilans in wagons going to woods to cut wood mile or so away from forts... 88 guys sent out (fettermans company) to guard wagon train. He was instructed by fort commander to not chase the indians... just cover wagons and wood cutters.... indians took pot shots.... he went after indians... ran smack into 1000 man indian trap, they killed everyone... all wood cutters all cav. Crazy Horse was the one that sent up the trap. This brought the US to the negotiation table... surprise surprise... red cloud won war.

Fair treaty for everybody... fact that we didn't live up to it is sad. First, created great sioux reservation. Divide N and S dakota in half... all western part was great Sioux reservation.... no one was allowed in there... but the traditional hunting grounds were in South eastern montana.... that was an issue..

US left forts... they burned them... Red Cloud said as long as people stayed on trail/railroad Red cloud would leave them alone... anybody who wandered off trail... well, that was it.

Peace for 7-8 years.... no one wanted to go into indian areas because they wouldn't come out.... but, eventually they found gold... wasn't alot but they thought it was going to be a lot like CA...... deadwood SD.... it was a "lawless" town because it was in the middle of the sioux reservation... no way for feds to go in to protect... no laws. Bill Hickock

Indian agents under Grant's admin started to steal--not just like normal, but on a grand scale. Red cloud... old man.. not up to fighting another war. Indians were supposed to be fed with beef and supplied with tools for farming and what not as part of us govt deal... but people just stole everything that had been agreed to be given to indians.... this caused the native americans to starve.

In late 1875, a large number of indians left the res and went to montana--old hunting grounds--back to nomadic way of life. INdian agents reported that 1200 men women and children left the res.... army was tasked with gathering them up and bringing them back. So, there was an army operation. 

So, army immediately tripled number fpr intel reasons... to 3600.. which meant about 1200 warriors... figured indian agents would have lied, because they wanted more to steal. Army made another intel assumption--that indians had few fire arms and just civil war guns and bows and spears---not the case. Indian agents were selling rifles to the indians! After the civil war... henry repeating rifle had been introduced... lever action, 1873 winchester initially designed by henry... improved by john browning. Bottom of 22 has a little h because winchester is honoring henry, who made their gun. Winchester was an entrepreneur. 

The 1000s of henry repeating rifles were confiscated in civil war were sold off to pay national debt... sold war ships etc... sold of lots of material. Army went from 800,000 men to 75,000.... lots of equipment sold off to pay of national debt.... down to 0 within two years. 

Henrys are on the open market... not a great hunting weapon. It's a 44 ring fire... 240 grain 44 cal bullet... pretty heavy (38 special is 158 grain)... only had like 25-30 grains of powder... could kill a man. not effective against a bear... held 18 shots. Easy to load... Confederates said load on sunday and fire all week... later winchesters had a port on side... these were easier to load because you could just load the bullets right into the tube spring loaded from the end of the barrel

Not a very powerful weapon. 1873 when winchester made the gun that won the west... that was a 44/40... which also wasn't that powerful... But army had 45/70, which would put a bear down. Infantry had the long gun 45/70 with bayonets... cav had the short carbines.... with cheap copper cartridges... cheaper... copper expanded... casings got stuck in barrel. Stopping power was high if you hit someone unlike the henrys...


They decided they'd do a 3 pronged attack... technically guy in charge is civ war gen named alfread terry... specialized in amphibous ops... took down fort fisher outside of wilmington. From south... general crook (experienced indian fighter).. crook was evenetually inducted into sioux tribe because he was a fair but good fighter... he has 1000 men coming... 20 companies of cav, another 6 companies of infantry... no wagons.. everything on mules... most troops are green... most experienced people are in cav, not inf.

From west John Gibbon... civ war gen, now a col.... east from ft. ellis---has the smallest force... has 6 co of inf and 4 co of cav approx 500 men

From east comes the terry column... terry tech in charge with entire 7th cav reg. 12 co of cav plus 5 co of in... 3 gattling gun units... custer brought along howitzer out of ft abraham in lincoln...

they meet at the river, set a camp ... mistake was not bringing mountain howitzers... would have been defenseless... getting hit with grenades basically. gattling guns not feasable... too heavy.

So, Terry and Gibbin meet... crook is supposed to meet but they never see him. He was detected by sioux... sioux does forced night march with 1500 warriors... battle of rosebud. 30 indians killed or wounded... similar number on crooks side... problem was crooks green troops shot up about a third of ammo... but indians killed all the mules... then indians retreated. Crook has no supplies and no way to get them because mules are dead... so, he has to turn around and head back to fort laramie...

Terry and custer, along with Gibbin decided what to do. They're not sure exactly where within the ciricle the indian encampment is... custer didn't find crooks battle damage... this might have changed things... but, custer finds a trail and decided to hit the indians. Custer's orders were descretionary... he was not told not to do that. some movies say that custer was told to wait until the 25th... but, the battle actually took place on 26th, so that doesnt matter... inf hadn't gotten there... to their benefit... because they would have been wiped out. custer's scouts told him YOU DOn't wanna go out there (crow indians... trad. enemies of sioux and cheyenne)


Now we get to the real battle

Custer decides how he's gonna do it... he'd done it before... broke 12 cos... he has packtrain with mules... logistics... they come in last. he devides other 11 into three batallions... one under marcus reno... always portrayed as idiot in movies who screwed this up... he was an idiot, but he didn't screw this up... he was an alcholic jerk... later dismissed from army for peering in windows at teenage girls...

Reno take 3 companies from Reno river toward village...  custer takes 5 companies and goes down the other creek... sent three companies off to south back toward terry... terry says you cannot allow them to escape to south. 

Fredrick benteen (capt... col during civ war)... 


Reno does charge on village... people from three indian villages respond (rest don't even think about it). Reno with 140 people are met by about 1800 indians... west there is all hilly country... reno trys to defend from foxholes expecting custer to come help... must retreat because indians flank

Indians are firing into trees... cav are shooting back... neither to good effect. Reno getting more and more shaky... talking to chief scout... scout gets shot in head and reno gets soaked in brains... reno just dips... crosses river... toward indians... troops follow b/c they thought that wa the order... his people dig in and hold... Reno has lost a third of people and half of what's left are wounded...

now banteen and packtrain show up to reinforce .... Reno got lucky


Custer shows up in middle of retreating and what not... crazy horse and his people block custer... and is pushed back up medicine tail cooly and comes back up to what's called calhoun hill, last stand hill, and the deep ravine... sets up defensively in each position...


the deep ravine was not traversable... so, they have a pretty good defense... but crazy horse flanks and makes a front assault.

Gall hear's all the shooting from down south... so instead of attacking to the east toward reno they head north to shots/custer at calhoun hill leaving reno...

Calhoun has 50 people on hill... when gall shows up... they were on the hill for 45 seconds... this is where they id the 450 henry repeating rifles shooting at them... no cover on hill... indians shot them off the hill... they had 70 winchesters... indians shooting from long range... from 300 yards, some of the,... the calhoun position collapses...

Gall's people head north toward last stand... everybody is completely surrpunded and shot off hill... in 20 mins went from good position to all dead... all 210. 


One of Custer's fav companies led by a guy named Weir didn't follow custer--good, because they would have died... benteen and Weir start to head toward hills to a place called weir point... they can see indians riding around firing in ground.. shooting few wounded and dead. Gall sees them and takes his people and heads back to rejoin Reno at the defensive position... lost one guy who was too slow.

Sitting Bull heads back south... packs up and leaves... gibbens people show up, benteen meets them... beneteen assumed that custer had just retreated to south... at this point reno was useless... benteen took over... someone looked over the other side of the river... all bodies... stripped... most mutilated. Religious stuff... horses dead. All men's eyes were poked out by the women.. so they would go into the after life blind...

Calvery used horses as barriers to hide behind.... 4000 warriors circling 200 people... 


University of Montana dug place up starting in late 1980s after a big prarie fire... govt. let them in and treated it as a crime scene... id'd cartridges and bullets... helped to figure out that calhoun hill was the first to fall... Army had this backwards until this research was done. 

When gibbon shows up... they send people over to the indian village... but the indians had all left... they started counting and realized the village the was 4 miles long... lots of bad guys there... they covered custer's body up with dirt... lied and said his body wasn't mutilated... wooden markers up for officers... one was never found, rest could be identified. Came back a year later b/c animals had dug up bodies, and they found pieces scattered... they dug a big pit and put them all there... most of the bones were horse bones.

10 years later... someone went out with stone markers... tried to find custer... never could.

Reno's thing is on private land now.... junior officer was sent to mark the 263 dead



Later... wounded knee... 7th cav shot up a whole village of sioux


Weir commited suicide because he felt he could have done something...









































































































































































